---
title: The best tech stack for web development in 2023
date: 2023-06-12
path: /best-tech-stack-for-web-development-2023
description:
  In this blog post I will share my thoughts on what's the best tech stack for
  web development in 2023 that will help you to build great web applications.
---

Developers love to **argue** about tech. They love to defend their tech stack to
the blood. They tell each other that language _XYZ_ is superior and only
inexperienced developers would choose _insert random tech stack here_ to achieve
a specific wanted outcome.

Often times these discussions **lead to nothing** because both sides are not
interested in the opinions of others and only want to present their arguments
and convince others why they should throw everything overboard and follow their
advice.

It’s solemnly an ego thing because developers get **attached** so much to their
tech stack. It feels so stupid, like arguing about which nation is better, with
the slight difference that you can’t choose your nationality.

---

**Table of Contents**

- [Your tech stack doesn’t matter](#your-tech-stack-doesnt-matter)
- [Changing your tech stack for the sake of it](#changing-your-tech-stack-for-the-sake-of-it)
- [From PHP to React](#from-php-to-react)
- [From NodeJS to Golang](#from-nodejs-to-golang)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

---

## Your tech stack doesn’t matter <a name="your-tech-stack-doesnt-matter"></a>

I want to be honest with you from the beginning. This blog post is inspired by
this video:
[How to OVER Engineer a Website // What is a Tech Stack? by Fireship ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sxxw3qtb3_g).

If you came here for advice on what tech to use for web development in 2023, I’m
sorry you won’t get that. **I tricked you**.

I won’t tell you to use `Next.js` with a `serverless database` for your CRUD
App. I won’t make the decision for you to pick a specific JavaScript Framework.
I won’t tell you to use `Redux, Recoil, Mobx, or Xstate` for state management in
`React`. I won’t tell you if you need to use `TypeScript` or `JSDoc` for type
safety or if you can skip it totally.

I want to make one particular point in this blog post. **The tech you use
doesn’t matter**. What matters is that you **satisfy the needs of your users**.
Your users don’t care what tech you use, but they do care if your website or
application works as intended and if they can achieve the task or find the
information they came for.

In addition, it matters that you choose and work with technology you’re
comfortable with. Being comfortable means, at least for me, that you know your
way around, you’re experienced with it, you are fast, you can find solutions
quickly, fix bugs, and you know your stuff.

You don’t need to jump the hype train every year or month. Instead, stick with
what you love to use. By following this guideline, you’ll be able to do what
your job is.

## Changing your tech stack for the sake of it <a name="changing-your-tech-stack-for-the-sake-of-it"></a>

I’ve had a few experiences in my web developer career where we, as a team, or
often our team leaders, decided to approach a significant tech stack change. If
you’re working in a larger team, technology choices are more complex and
different than working alone.

People have different experiences, skills, and preferences, and you need to
collect all of that and choose the best matching tech stack based on that. Not
an easy task.

Sometimes this is inevitable. Sometimes you have no choice. For example, when
part of your technology is no longer safe, support for it ends, or better
alternatives exist.

I’ve had a few situations in my career where we approached significant tech
stack changes. I want to highlight two of them here. These were kind of
“Changing your tech stack for the sake of it” situations.

What do I mean by that? Some new tech comes around, and everyone starts jumping
on it and tells you you need to switch to that immediately because it’s cool,
shiny, and new.

There wasn’t enough evidence yet that this technology proved to be better 100%,
and of course, there wasn’t enough experience among the developers.

## From PHP to React <a name="from-php-to-react"></a>

A few years ago, I worked in a team responsible for one particular part of a big
website. This part contained a lot of “legacy” code. It was written a few years
back with mainly PHP. When a new, big part was added to the website, which a
different team was responsible for, the decision was made to build that with
React.

This decision was great, React was established and widely adopted, and the
developers were experienced with it. Based on that decision, another decision
was made to **rebuild our part of the website with React**. Management wanted a
re-brush, a different look for it, so it was clear that we would have to work on
it anyway.

But besides that, there were no complaints or arguments for refactoring. The
performance was great. The only downsides were a bit outdated look and a lot of
legacy, poorly structured PHP code. We were more than happy about the decision
to rebuild it with React. We were all experienced React developers and wanted to
get rid of PHP at that point. We wanted to use what everyone was using at that
time. So it felt great to do the refactoring. Remove the old, in with the new!

Why I’m talking about this? In the beginning, I said it doesn’t matter what tech
you use, right? So this change shouldn’t be a big deal. However, shortly after,
and also a few years later, I reflected on that tech stack change, and **I’m
still not convinced that it was a great idea**.

Performance was **worse** after the rebuild due to our mistakes when working
with React. It took a **long time** to do something like that just for a
different look. We could have worked on fixing bugs or building user features
instead.

I’m not sure there is a right or wrong here. I want to highlight that it doesn’t
matter what technology you use if you focus on building for your users. Changing
your tech stack should be a decision you’ve thought about for a long time and
have a long list of reasonable arguments for it. Our users don’t notice if we’re
using PHP or React. But they do see when the page takes longer to load.

## From NodeJS to Golang <a name="from-nodejs-to-golang"></a>

On another former job, the decision was made to switch from NodeJS to Go on the
backend. The tech stack for most projects before at that company for the backend
was NodeJs, and we had a lot of experienced developers in it.

**Nobody knew Go**, and we needed to kick-start a new and critical project
immediately. The arguments for the switch were that Go was getting traction, and
there was some first evidence that it was faster and better-suitable for
projects that needed to scale.

So the decision was made for us. Everybody on the team needed to learn Go from
scratch. We had one or two persons who had some experience with it but not in a
production environment.

This was tough because we had a **deadline** and needed to **figure out first
every basic stuff** of a new backend language. This was the definition of
learning by doing.

In the end, it worked out, we had a lot of fun working with Go, and we learned a
lot and enjoyed it. But I wouldn’t say that this was a good decision. Everything
we needed to accomplish in the new project, we could have also done with NodeJS,
and it wasn’t much more than a CRUD App, so no scaling was needed right away.

The decision to switch from NodeJS to Go was made company-wide, so it wasn’t
solely a tech stack change to play with the new toys. But I also wouldn’t say
that it was necessary. We needed more time to build stuff because we had to
learn everything first.

We had to do a lot of refactorings all the time because best practices changed,
and we didn’t always do things right. In conclusion, it felt like a tech stack
change for the sake of it. Go seemed to be faster and better for scalable
projects, but we didn’t need that, and NodeJS is still a very capable backend
language suited for almost every bigger backend. But, once again, **our users
didn't notice anything** about that. They just want to get their data.

## Conclusion <a name="conclusion"></a>

The tech you choose doesn’t matter. **There is not best tech stack for web
development in 2023**. Your users don’t care about it. Choose the tech you’re
comfortable with, experienced in and have a lot of fun using it.

Choose the tech with whom you can build features and fix bugs fast, satisfy your
users needs and keep things running. Don’t switch to tech because it’s the new
shiny thing and most importantly: don’t trust the hype.
