---
title: Developer Diaries 14
date: 2023-08-14
path: /developer-diaries-14
description:
  'Developer Diaries 14 is about shifting priorities, working with friends, and
  traveling to the UK.'
---

Hello and welcome to the Developer Diary number 14! As you may or may not have
noticed, I **skipped** the June edition of this blog post series. It wasn’t like
I didn’t have time for it. I just changed my priorities in June.

I focused more on developing Work and drew back on writing for a while. It was a
good decision, and I didn’t feel bad about it. So this blog post will be about
June AND July, I guess. A lot can happen in two months, and **a lot happened**
in the last two months, so let’s dive right in!

## 👨🏻‍💻 Work

I already mentioned that I’m part of the
[Prismic Developer Program](https://prismic.io/hire-a-developer) last month.
It’s a great opportunity because it opens a lot of possibilities. I’d like to
**highlight** one special connection that I made a few weeks ago.

I got an inquiry through Prismic, where one person asked for development support
for a website they were doing for a client. I agreed to a first meeting, and we
met via Zoom. After talking about the project, sharing advice, and helping where
I could, I figured **this person was developing this website while learning
JavaScript, React, and Next.js simultaneously**.

What an inspiring person, but also what a big project to tackle. I was already
overwhelmed with learning JavaScript alone back in the day. So much respect for
this person for keeping good spirits and not giving up. That was really
inspiring.

Besides that, the biggest highlight in July was working on a project with my
friends from [b13](https://b13.com). They are well known for developing huge
websites powered by the CMS [Typo3](https://typo3.org/) and are the experts in
this field. I started my web developer career with them a few years ago, and it
was a lot of fun to work together again. I developed the Frontend for the
project, and they took it and integrated it into the Typo3 environment.

## 📝 Blog Posts of the Month

As you may have noticed, there are no blog posts this month! But I’m not too sad
about it. Like I said in the beginning, I just had **different priorities**. My
backlog is full of ideas, so stay tuned for more in the coming weeks!

## 🎓 TIL Posts of the month

Same as above! 🙂

## 🏡 Life

In the middle of June, we had a small holiday where we did **three days of
hiking** in the black forest. It was amazing. Beautiful landscapes, perfect
weather, and 3 days of walking are wellness for the mind. And it feels great to
walk to your next destination or hotel instead of making just round trips. Would
love to do this more often.

<Image
  src="/images/black-forest-hike.webp"
  alt="An overview over the black forest from a cabin"
  width={1024}
  height={768}
/>

We celebrated our **first wedding anniversary**! Time flies, and it’s already
one year since we got married. I also remembered what a crazy year it was last
year, starting as a freelancer and getting married simultaneously. But it never
felt scary. It felt like doing the right thing all the time.

We finally had our **biggest holiday** this year at the end of July. We went to
the **UK for a wedding**. We took the train to London, and it was our first time
driving through the underwater tunnel with the Eurostar. It was such an
enjoyable experience. I would always prefer this over taking a plane.

You don’t have to worry about your luggage; it takes almost the same amount of
time and feels less stressful. We spent a few days in London before we headed to
Manchester for the wedding. The wedding felt terrific, and we felt very grateful
that we could be a part of it. After that, we went for a few days to Edinburgh,
which we absolutely loved, before heading back to London and taking the train
home.

I’ve already been to the UK before, but I didn’t remember how nice, polite and
friendly the people there are. Traveling by train around the UK was also a great
experience (compared to Germany), and being able to pay for everything with your
phone and having no need for cash made this a perfect holiday.

## 🏋🏻‍♀️ Fitness

I did the biggest cycling tour ever with a great friend. It was 136km in total,
and it was a blast. It was one of the biggest challenges I ever did, and we
crushed it. Can’t wait to start the next adventure like this!

<Image
  src="/images/cycling-tour.webp"
  alt="Me on my bike with a beautiful landscape in the background"
  width={1024}
  height={768}
/>

## 🕹Video Games

I’m totally back into Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom. After neglecting it for a
while, I played a lot while traveling, and it was just so much fun.

That’s it for June and July 2023. See you next month!
