---
title: Two good reasons to use React
date: 2020-03-25
path: /two-good-reasons-to-use-react
---

If you would ask me about two good reasons why I like to work with **React** -
and use it primarily when doing frontend development - it would really make me
think.

When I first started to work with React I didn't have a real choice. I started
working at a job where there was no question if we should use
[Angular](https://angular.io/), [Vue](https://vuejs.org/) or
[Svelte](https://svelte.dev/) or anything else.

No, it was already defined that React would be the weapon of choice and there
was already written a lot of code in React. I was just thrown into this React
hole and never had the chance to crawl back out. End of story.

![a gif of two men walking, one falls into a hole](https://media.giphy.com/media/O2zL3TVRhZuGk/giphy.gif)

No not really. Of course not. It's true that I had no choice back then but I
never stopped thinking about how we would build this feature or solve that
problem without React or with VanillaJS or even without any JavaScript at all!

If you google "Reasons to use React" you get a lot clever points and different
opinions. I even read about advantages of React I never heard about before. I
really have to get into this
[Concurrent Mode stuff](https://reactjs.org/docs/concurrent-mode-intro.html).

Anyway, after this research my list of reasons grew bigger and bigger but I
noticed despite all this points being true and reasonable arguments there was no
real point where I could put my heart into.

So I set all the lists and research stuff aside, closed all the tabs and really
started thinking.

![a gif of two girls, sitting on a desk, where one throws all the papers off the desk](https://media.giphy.com/media/B23grX5C9g9sKNt9Xk/giphy.gif)

And this is what I came up with:

### Reason one: popularity

Don't get me wrong. I don't like React because so many cool people use it and if
they would switch to the next cool thing I would switch too.

When we talk about the web development world one big thing you always hear is:
"have you heard about this new JS framework?". In our field everything is moving
so **fast** and everything changes really **quickly**.

But if you take a closer look, you will notice that React is here since
**2013**. That's like **VERY OLD** in this web thingy. It's the one JS framework
with the most GitHub stars (146k in March, 2020) and is used by 3,3 million
people, [according to GitHub](https://github.com/facebook/react).

To translate this: I don't like React because it's so popular in general or it
is so "old". I like it because of all the **perks** these two points bring with
them.

Due to these facts React has a **massive community** behind it. There is always
an active and (in most cases) constructive discussion on Twitter about new
features and problems where you can get help from and learn a lot.

There are super great subreddits like
[/r/reactjs](https://www.reddit.com/r/reactjs) where every news about React is
being discussed, people present cool tools they built with React and if you need
help, people will take a look at your problem and suggest solutions.

There are so much great tutorials, blog articles, video courses and podcasts on
React which teach you everything about it.

A lot people may have had the same problem or bug as you and there are already
bulletproof solutions available. People help each other whenever they can, which
makes the journey to get better in React a lot of fun.

And finally: React has one of the best
[Docs](https://reactjs.org/docs/getting-started.html) I've ever used which gets
better and better everyday.

### Reason two: it's just a view library

React is not a full framework. Instead it focuses on the **view layer,** on
building user interfaces and on building what the user interacts with and what
helps him, accomplish several tasks.

For me, this meant that I did not have that steep of a **learning curve** and it
was very **straightforward** to use. Because the great thing is: if you know
**JavaScript** you're good to go! And that is something, which I think, is
really cool.

React comes into action when you have a static website and want to switch to a
website where the focus is on the user interactions and updates of the user
interface.

You just want to build a view that **reacts** on the user input and is clever
enough to only **update** what should be updated. It enables you to take that
step without shipping you overly complex extra stuff you don't need. That's why
React is your best bet and why I like it so much.

Of course at some point you may need additional tools, which are not included in
React by default - like routing or other state management solutions. But in most
cases you won't need these and you're good to go with what you get from the
beginning.

So that's it, these are my two good reasons to use React. What are yours? Hit me
up on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/marcoheine-com) or send me an
[email](mailto:marco@marcoheine.com).
